docs/docs/patterns.mdx, before:

---
sidebar_position: 5
title: Patterns
---

import TrellisDemo from '@site/src/components/TrellisDemo';

# Common Patterns

Patterns you'll use frequently when building Trellis applications.

## Two-Way Binding with mutable()

For form inputs, use `mutable()` to create two-way bindings between state and widgets:

<TrellisDemo
  title="Two-Way Binding"
  code={`from dataclasses import dataclass
from trellis import Stateful, component, mutable
from trellis import widgets as w

@dataclass
class FormState(Stateful):
    name: str
    email: str
    subscribed: bool

@component
def Form():
    state = FormState(name="", email="", subscribed=False)

    with w.Column(gap=12):
        w.Heading(text="Sign Up", level=2)

        w.TextInput(
            value=mutable(state.name),
            placeholder="Name",
        )
        w.TextInput(
            value=mutable(state.email),
            placeholder="Email",
        )
        w.Checkbox(
            checked=mutable(state.subscribed),
            label="Subscribe to newsletter",
        )

        w.Divider()
        w.Label(text=f"Name: {state.name}")
        w.Label(text=f"Email: {state.email}")
        w.Label(text=f"Subscribed: {state.subscribed}")

App = Form`}
/>

The `mutable()` function captures a reference to the state property. When the widget value changes, the state updates automatically, which triggers a re-render.

## Passing State via Props

State lives in one component but can be passed to children as props:

```python
from dataclasses import dataclass
from trellis import Stateful, component
from trellis import html as h
from trellis import widgets as w

@dataclass
class AppState(Stateful):
    user_name: str = "Alice"

@component
def Header(name: str) -> None:
    w.Heading(text=f"Welcome, {name}!")

@component
def App() -> None:
    state = AppState()

    with w.Column():
        Header(name=state.user_name)  # Pass state as prop
        w.Label(text="Content goes here")
```

The `Header` component re-renders when `user_name` changes, even though it doesn't own the state.

## Callbacks That Modify State

Pass state methods as callbacks to child components:

<TrellisDemo
  title="Callbacks"
  code={`from dataclasses import dataclass
from trellis import Stateful, component
from trellis import html as h
from trellis import widgets as w

@dataclass
class CounterState(Stateful):
    count: int

    def increment(self):
        self.count += 1

    def decrement(self):
        self.count -= 1

    def reset(self):
        self.count = 0

@component
def Controls(on_increment, on_decrement, on_reset):
    with w.Row(gap=8):
        w.Button(text="-", on_click=on_decrement)
        w.Button(text="+", on_click=on_increment)
        w.Button(text="Reset", on_click=on_reset, variant="outline")

@component
def App():
    state = CounterState(count=0)

    with w.Column(gap=12):
        w.Heading(text=f"Count: {state.count}", level=2)
        Controls(
            on_increment=state.increment,
            on_decrement=state.decrement,
            on_reset=state.reset,
        )

App = App`}
/>

This pattern keeps state management centralized while letting child components trigger updates.

## Conditional Rendering

Use Python's `if` statements to conditionally render elements:

```python
@component
def App() -> None:
    state = AppState()

    with w.Column():
        if state.is_loading:
            w.Label(text="Loading...")
        elif state.error:
            w.Label(text=f"Error: {state.error}", color="red")
        else:
            w.Label(text=f"Data: {state.data}")
```

<TrellisDemo
  title="Conditional Rendering"
  code={`from dataclasses import dataclass
from trellis import Stateful, component
from trellis import html as h
from trellis import widgets as w

@dataclass
class ToggleState(Stateful):
    show_details: bool

    def toggle(self):
        self.show_details = not self.show_details

@component
def App():
    state = ToggleState(show_details=False)

    with w.Column(gap=12):
        w.Heading(text="Product", level=2)
        w.Label(text="A great product for all your needs.")

        w.Button(
            text="Hide Details" if state.show_details else "Show Details",
            on_click=state.toggle,
        )

        if state.show_details:
            with w.Card():
                w.Label(text="Price: $99.99")
                w.Label(text="In stock: Yes")
                w.Label(text="Ships in 2-3 days")

App = App`}
/>

## Lists

Render lists by iterating with `for`:

```python
@component
def ItemList() -> None:
    items = ["Apple", "Banana", "Cherry"]

    with w.Column():
        for item in items:
            w.Label(text=item)
```

### Dynamic Lists with State

<TrellisDemo
  title="Dynamic List"
  code={`from dataclasses import dataclass
from trellis import Stateful, component
from trellis import html as h
from trellis import widgets as w

@dataclass
class ListState(Stateful):
    items: list[str]
    counter: int

    def add(self):
        self.items.append(f"Item {self.counter}")
        self.counter += 1

    def remove(self, item: str):
        self.items.remove(item)

@component
def App():
    state = ListState(items=["First item", "Second item"], counter=3)

    with w.Column(gap=12):
        w.Heading(text="Items", level=2)

        if not state.items:
            w.Label(text="No items yet.", color="#888")
        else:
            for item in state.items:
                with w.Row(gap=8, align="center"):
                    w.Label(text=item, style={"flex": "1"})
                    w.Button(text="Remove", on_click=lambda i=item: state.remove(i), variant="ghost")

        w.Button(text="Add Item", on_click=state.add)

App = App`}
/>

### The Lambda Capture Pattern

When creating callbacks in a loop, capture the loop variable with a default argument:

```python
# Wrong - all callbacks use the last value of `item`
for item in items:
    Button(text="Remove", on_click=lambda: remove(item))

# Correct - each callback captures its own value
for item in items:
    Button(text="Remove", on_click=lambda i=item: remove(i))
```

The `i=item` creates a new binding for each iteration.

## Component Composition

Break complex UIs into smaller components:

<TrellisDemo
  title="Composition"
  code={`from dataclasses import dataclass
from trellis import Stateful, component
from trellis import html as h
from trellis import widgets as w

# Reusable stat display
@component
def Stat(label: str, value: str):
    with w.Row(gap=8):
        w.Label(text=f"{label}:", bold=True)
        w.Label(text=value)

@dataclass
class DashboardState(Stateful):
    users: int
    revenue: int

    def refresh(self):
        self.users += 10
        self.revenue += 100

@component
def Dashboard():
    state = DashboardState(users=1234, revenue=56789)

    with w.Column(gap=16):
        w.Heading(text="Dashboard")

        with w.Card():
            Stat(label="Total Users", value=str(state.users))
            Stat(label="Active Today", value="89")

        with w.Card():
            Stat(label="Total", value=str(state.revenue))
            Stat(label="This Month", value="$12,345")

        w.Button(text="Refresh Data", on_click=state.refresh)

App = Dashboard`}
/>

## Responding to Theme Changes

Access the current theme and style components accordingly:

<TrellisDemo
  title="Theme-Aware Component"
  code={`from trellis import component
from trellis.app import TrellisApp, ClientState, theme
from trellis import widgets as w

@component
def ThemeAwareCard():
    state = ClientState.from_context()

    with w.Card(style={
        "backgroundColor": theme.bg_surface,
        "border": f"1px solid {theme.border_default}",
        "padding": "16px",
    }):
        w.Label(
            text=f"Current theme: {'Dark' if state.is_dark else 'Light'}",
            color=theme.text_primary,
        )
        w.Button(text="Toggle Theme", on_click=state.toggle)

@component
def Main():
    TrellisApp(app=ThemeAwareCard)

App = Main`}
/>

Use `theme` tokens for colors that adapt automatically, and `ClientState.from_context()` when you need conditional logic based on the active theme.

## Next Steps

- [Theming](./theming) — Dark mode, theme tokens, and styling
- [Design Overview](./design/overview) — How Trellis works under the hood
- [State Management](./design/state) — Deep dive into the state system
- [UI and Rendering](./design/ui-rendering) — How rendering works

Commit message:

Add element traits with fluent .key() API
BREAKING CHANGE: Remove key parameter from all HTML elements and widgets.
Keys must now be set via the fluent .key() method:

  # Before
  Button(text="Click", key="btn-1")

  # After
  Button(text="Click").key("btn-1")

Core changes:
- Add KeyTrait mixin providing .key() method that returns self for chaining
- Element now inherits from KeyTrait, with key stored as _key
- Component base class gains element_class parameter for custom Element subclasses
- @component, @react_component_base, @html_element decorators support element_class

This enables custom traits on elements (e.g., .test_id() for testing) by
creating Element subclasses with additional trait methods.

Removed key: str | None = None parameter from:
- 58 HTML element functions (forms, layout, links, lists, tables, text)
- 38 widget functions (actions, basic, charts, data, feedback, icons,
  layout, navigation, table)

Updated documentation and examples to use the new fluent API.

docs/docs/patterns.mdx, after:

---
sidebar_position: 5
title: Patterns
---

import TrellisDemo from '@site/src/components/TrellisDemo';

# Common Patterns

Patterns you'll use frequently when building Trellis applications.

## Two-Way Binding with mutable()

For form inputs, use `mutable()` to create two-way bindings between state and widgets:

<TrellisDemo
  title="Two-Way Binding"
  code={`from dataclasses import dataclass
from trellis import Stateful, component, mutable
from trellis import widgets as w

@dataclass
class FormState(Stateful):
    name: str
    email: str
    subscribed: bool

@component
def Form():
    state = FormState(name="", email="", subscribed=False)

    with w.Column(gap=12):
        w.Heading(text="Sign Up", level=2)

        w.TextInput(
            value=mutable(state.name),
            placeholder="Name",
        )
        w.TextInput(
            value=mutable(state.email),
            placeholder="Email",
        )
        w.Checkbox(
            checked=mutable(state.subscribed),
            label="Subscribe to newsletter",
        )

        w.Divider()
        w.Label(text=f"Name: {state.name}")
        w.Label(text=f"Email: {state.email}")
        w.Label(text=f"Subscribed: {state.subscribed}")

App = Form`}
/>

The `mutable()` function captures a reference to the state property. When the widget value changes, the state updates automatically, which triggers a re-render.

## Passing State via Props

State lives in one component but can be passed to children as props:

```python
from dataclasses import dataclass
from trellis import Stateful, component
from trellis import html as h
from trellis import widgets as w

@dataclass
class AppState(Stateful):
    user_name: str = "Alice"

@component
def Header(name: str) -> None:
    w.Heading(text=f"Welcome, {name}!")

@component
def App() -> None:
    state = AppState()

    with w.Column():
        Header(name=state.user_name)  # Pass state as prop
        w.Label(text="Content goes here")
```

The `Header` component re-renders when `user_name` changes, even though it doesn't own the state.

## Callbacks That Modify State

Pass state methods as callbacks to child components:

<TrellisDemo
  title="Callbacks"
  code={`from dataclasses import dataclass
from trellis import Stateful, component
from trellis import html as h
from trellis import widgets as w

@dataclass
class CounterState(Stateful):
    count: int

    def increment(self):
        self.count += 1

    def decrement(self):
        self.count -= 1

    def reset(self):
        self.count = 0

@component
def Controls(on_increment, on_decrement, on_reset):
    with w.Row(gap=8):
        w.Button(text="-", on_click=on_decrement)
        w.Button(text="+", on_click=on_increment)
        w.Button(text="Reset", on_click=on_reset, variant="outline")

@component
def App():
    state = CounterState(count=0)

    with w.Column(gap=12):
        w.Heading(text=f"Count: {state.count}", level=2)
        Controls(
            on_increment=state.increment,
            on_decrement=state.decrement,
            on_reset=state.reset,
        )

App = App`}
/>

This pattern keeps state management centralized while letting child components trigger updates.

## Conditional Rendering

Use Python's `if` statements to conditionally render elements:

```python
@component
def App() -> None:
    state = AppState()

    with w.Column():
        if state.is_loading:
            w.Label(text="Loading...")
        elif state.error:
            w.Label(text=f"Error: {state.error}", color="red")
        else:
            w.Label(text=f"Data: {state.data}")
```

<TrellisDemo
  title="Conditional Rendering"
  code={`from dataclasses import dataclass
from trellis import Stateful, component
from trellis import html as h
from trellis import widgets as w

@dataclass
class ToggleState(Stateful):
    show_details: bool

    def toggle(self):
        self.show_details = not self.show_details

@component
def App():
    state = ToggleState(show_details=False)

    with w.Column(gap=12):
        w.Heading(text="Product", level=2)
        w.Label(text="A great product for all your needs.")

        w.Button(
            text="Hide Details" if state.show_details else "Show Details",
            on_click=state.toggle,
        )

        if state.show_details:
            with w.Card():
                w.Label(text="Price: $99.99")
                w.Label(text="In stock: Yes")
                w.Label(text="Ships in 2-3 days")

App = App`}
/>

## Lists

Render lists by iterating with `for`:

```python
@component
def ItemList() -> None:
    items = ["Apple", "Banana", "Cherry"]

    with w.Column():
        for item in items:
            w.Label(text=item)
```

### Dynamic Lists with State

<TrellisDemo
  title="Dynamic List"
  code={`from dataclasses import dataclass
from trellis import Stateful, component
from trellis import html as h
from trellis import widgets as w

@dataclass
class ListState(Stateful):
    items: list[str]
    counter: int

    def add(self):
        self.items.append(f"Item {self.counter}")
        self.counter += 1

    def remove(self, item: str):
        self.items.remove(item)

@component
def App():
    state = ListState(items=["First item", "Second item"], counter=3)

    with w.Column(gap=12):
        w.Heading(text="Items", level=2)

        if not state.items:
            w.Label(text="No items yet.", color="#888")
        else:
            for item in state.items:
                with w.Row(gap=8, align="center"):
                    w.Label(text=item, style={"flex": "1"})
                    w.Button(text="Remove", on_click=lambda i=item: state.remove(i), variant="ghost")

        w.Button(text="Add Item", on_click=state.add)

App = App`}
/>

### The Lambda Capture Pattern

When creating callbacks in a loop, capture the loop variable with a default argument:

```python
# Wrong - all callbacks use the last value of `item`
for item in items:
    Button(text="Remove", on_click=lambda: remove(item))

# Correct - each callback captures its own value
for item in items:
    Button(text="Remove", on_click=lambda i=item: remove(i))
```

The `i=item` creates a new binding for each iteration.

### Keys for List Items

When rendering dynamic lists, use `.key()` to help Trellis track items across renders:

```python
@component
def ItemList(items: list[str]) -> None:
    for item in items:
        with h.Div().key(item):  # Key by the item's unique identifier
            h.Span(item)
            Button(text="Remove", on_click=lambda i=item: remove(i))
```

Keys are important because:
- They help Trellis match elements when items are reordered, added, or removed
- Without keys, Trellis uses position, which can cause incorrect state preservation
- Keys should be stable and unique within the list (IDs, not indices)

## Component Composition

Break complex UIs into smaller components:

<TrellisDemo
  title="Composition"
  code={`from dataclasses import dataclass
from trellis import Stateful, component
from trellis import html as h
from trellis import widgets as w

# Reusable stat display
@component
def Stat(label: str, value: str):
    with w.Row(gap=8):
        w.Label(text=f"{label}:", bold=True)
        w.Label(text=value)

@dataclass
class DashboardState(Stateful):
    users: int
    revenue: int

    def refresh(self):
        self.users += 10
        self.revenue += 100

@component
def Dashboard():
    state = DashboardState(users=1234, revenue=56789)

    with w.Column(gap=16):
        w.Heading(text="Dashboard")

        with w.Card():
            Stat(label="Total Users", value=str(state.users))
            Stat(label="Active Today", value="89")

        with w.Card():
            Stat(label="Total", value=str(state.revenue))
            Stat(label="This Month", value="$12,345")

        w.Button(text="Refresh Data", on_click=state.refresh)

App = Dashboard`}
/>

## Responding to Theme Changes

Access the current theme and style components accordingly:

<TrellisDemo
  title="Theme-Aware Component"
  code={`from trellis import component
from trellis.app import TrellisApp, ClientState, theme
from trellis import widgets as w

@component
def ThemeAwareCard():
    state = ClientState.from_context()

    with w.Card(style={
        "backgroundColor": theme.bg_surface,
        "border": f"1px solid {theme.border_default}",
        "padding": "16px",
    }):
        w.Label(
            text=f"Current theme: {'Dark' if state.is_dark else 'Light'}",
            color=theme.text_primary,
        )
        w.Button(text="Toggle Theme", on_click=state.toggle)

@component
def Main():
    TrellisApp(app=ThemeAwareCard)

App = Main`}
/>

Use `theme` tokens for colors that adapt automatically, and `ClientState.from_context()` when you need conditional logic based on the active theme.

## Next Steps

- [Theming](./theming) — Dark mode, theme tokens, and styling
- [Design Overview](./design/overview) — How Trellis works under the hood
- [State Management](./design/state) — Deep dive into the state system
- [UI and Rendering](./design/ui-rendering) — How rendering works
