docs/docs/theming.mdx, before:

---
sidebar_position: 6
title: Theming
---

import TrellisDemo from '@site/src/components/TrellisDemo';

# Theming

Trellis includes built-in dark mode support with automatic OS theme detection and a complete set of design tokens for styling.

## Quick Start

Wrap your app with `TrellisApp` to enable theming:

```python
from trellis import component
from trellis.app import TrellisApp, ClientState
from trellis import widgets as w

@component
def MyApp():
    state = ClientState.from_context()
    w.Label(text=f"Theme: {'Dark' if state.is_dark else 'Light'}")

@component
def Main():
    TrellisApp(app=MyApp)
```

`TrellisApp` provides:
- `ClientState` accessible via context
- Automatic OS theme detection
- `ThemeProvider` for CSS theming

## ThemeSwitcher Widget

Add a theme toggle button with `ThemeSwitcher`:

<TrellisDemo
  title="Theme Switcher"
  code={`from trellis import component
from trellis.app import TrellisApp, ClientState
from trellis import widgets as w

@component
def MyApp():
    state = ClientState.from_context()

    with w.Column(gap=16):
        with w.Row(gap=8, align="center"):
            w.Label(text="Toggle theme:")
            w.ThemeSwitcher()

        w.Label(text=f"Mode: {state.theme.value}")
        w.Label(text=f"Resolved: {'Dark' if state.is_dark else 'Light'}")

@component
def Main():
    TrellisApp(app=MyApp)

App = Main`}
/>

The switcher cycles through: **System** (follows OS) → **Light** → **Dark** → **System**...

## ClientState API

Access theme state anywhere within a `TrellisApp`:

```python
from trellis.app import ClientState

state = ClientState.from_context()

# Properties
state.theme_setting  # ThemeMode.SYSTEM | LIGHT | DARK
state.theme          # Actual theme: LIGHT or DARK
state.is_dark        # True if dark mode active
state.is_light       # True if light mode active

# Methods
state.toggle()       # Cycle to next mode
state.set_mode("dark")  # Set explicitly
```

## Theme Tokens

Use `theme` tokens for colors that adapt to light/dark mode:

```python
from trellis.app import theme
from trellis import html as h

h.Div(
    style={
        "backgroundColor": theme.bg_surface,
        "color": theme.text_primary,
        "border": f"1px solid {theme.border_default}",
    }
)
```

### Available Tokens

| Category | Tokens |
|----------|--------|
| **Backgrounds** | `bg_page`, `bg_surface`, `bg_surface_raised`, `bg_surface_hover`, `bg_input` |
| **Text** | `text_primary`, `text_secondary`, `text_muted`, `text_inverse` |
| **Borders** | `border_default`, `border_subtle`, `border_strong`, `border_focus` |
| **Accent** | `accent_primary`, `accent_primary_hover`, `accent_subtle` |
| **Semantic** | `success`, `warning`, `info`, `error`, `error_hover` |
| **Shadows** | `shadow_sm`, `shadow_md`, `shadow_lg` |
| **Focus** | `focus_ring_color` |

Each token is a CSS variable reference (e.g., `theme.text_primary` → `var(--trellis-text-primary)`) that automatically updates when the theme changes.

## Conditional Styling

For logic that depends on the current theme:

<TrellisDemo
  title="Conditional Styling"
  code={`from trellis import component
from trellis.app import TrellisApp, ClientState
from trellis import widgets as w
from trellis.app import theme

@component
def ThemeAwareCard():
    state = ClientState.from_context()

    with w.Card(style={"padding": "16px"}):
        w.Heading(text="Theme-Aware Card", level=3)
        w.Label(
            text=f"Current theme: {'Dark' if state.is_dark else 'Light'}",
            color=theme.text_secondary,
        )
        w.ThemeSwitcher()

@component
def Main():
    TrellisApp(app=ThemeAwareCard)

App = Main`}
/>

## How It Works

1. **Connection**: Client sends OS theme preference in hello message
2. **Initialization**: `TrellisApp` creates `ClientState` with detected theme
3. **Rendering**: `ThemeProvider` sets `data-theme` attribute on root element
4. **CSS Variables**: Tokens resolve based on `[data-theme="light"]` or `[data-theme="dark"]`
5. **Updates**: When OS theme changes (in System mode), client notifies server, triggering re-render

Commit message:

Refactor handler layering to remove trellis.app dependency
MessageHandler now uses dependency injection via AppWrapper callback
instead of directly importing from trellis.app. This eliminates the
circular import that forced inline imports and improves separation
between infrastructure (platforms) and application (trellis.app).

Key changes:
- Add AppWrapper type alias: Callable[[Component, str, str|None], Component]
- MessageHandler accepts app_wrapper, defers RenderSession creation to
  handle_hello() after receiving theme info from client
- Trellis._create_app_wrapper() encapsulates TrellisApp/ClientState logic
- All platform handlers updated to pass app_wrapper through

Also cleans up ClientState/ThemeProvider interface:
- ClientState.set_mode() now requires ThemeMode enum (not strings)
- handle_system_theme_change() takes ThemeMode instead of string
- ThemeProvider uses string literals for JSON serialization to JS
- TrellisApp bridges between string callbacks and enum methods

Tests updated with app_wrapper fixture in conftest.py.

docs/docs/theming.mdx, after:

---
sidebar_position: 6
title: Theming
---

import TrellisDemo from '@site/src/components/TrellisDemo';

# Theming

Trellis includes built-in dark mode support with automatic OS theme detection and a complete set of design tokens for styling.

## Quick Start

Use `theme` tokens for colors that adapt automatically to light/dark mode:

```python
from trellis.app import theme
from trellis import html as h

h.Div(
    style={
        "backgroundColor": theme.bg_surface,
        "color": theme.text_primary,
        "border": f"1px solid {theme.border_default}",
    }
)
```

Theme tokens are CSS variable references that automatically update when the theme changes.

## ThemeSwitcher Widget

Add a theme toggle button with `ThemeSwitcher`:

<TrellisDemo
  title="Theme Switcher"
  code={`from trellis import component
from trellis.app import TrellisApp, ClientState
from trellis import widgets as w

@component
def MyApp():
    state = ClientState.from_context()

    with w.Column(gap=16):
        with w.Row(gap=8, align="center"):
            w.Label(text="Toggle theme:")
            w.ThemeSwitcher()

        w.Label(text=f"Mode: {state.theme.value}")
        w.Label(text=f"Resolved: {'Dark' if state.is_dark else 'Light'}")

@component
def Main():
    TrellisApp(app=MyApp)

App = Main`}
/>

The switcher cycles through: **System** (follows OS) → **Light** → **Dark** → **System**...

## ClientState API

Access theme state anywhere in your app:

```python
from trellis.app import ClientState, ThemeMode

state = ClientState.from_context()

# Properties
state.theme_setting  # ThemeMode.SYSTEM | LIGHT | DARK
state.theme          # Actual theme: LIGHT or DARK
state.is_dark        # True if dark mode active
state.is_light       # True if light mode active

# Methods
state.toggle()                    # Cycle to next mode
state.set_mode(ThemeMode.DARK)    # Set explicitly
```

## Theme Tokens

Use `theme` tokens for colors that adapt to light/dark mode:

```python
from trellis.app import theme
from trellis import html as h

h.Div(
    style={
        "backgroundColor": theme.bg_surface,
        "color": theme.text_primary,
        "border": f"1px solid {theme.border_default}",
    }
)
```

### Available Tokens

| Category | Tokens |
|----------|--------|
| **Backgrounds** | `bg_page`, `bg_surface`, `bg_surface_raised`, `bg_surface_hover`, `bg_input` |
| **Text** | `text_primary`, `text_secondary`, `text_muted`, `text_inverse` |
| **Borders** | `border_default`, `border_subtle`, `border_strong`, `border_focus` |
| **Accent** | `accent_primary`, `accent_primary_hover`, `accent_subtle` |
| **Semantic** | `success`, `warning`, `info`, `error`, `error_hover` |
| **Shadows** | `shadow_sm`, `shadow_md`, `shadow_lg` |
| **Focus** | `focus_ring_color` |

Each token is a CSS variable reference (e.g., `theme.text_primary` → `var(--trellis-text-primary)`) that automatically updates when the theme changes.

## Conditional Styling

For logic that depends on the current theme:

<TrellisDemo
  title="Conditional Styling"
  code={`from trellis import component
from trellis.app import TrellisApp, ClientState
from trellis import widgets as w
from trellis.app import theme

@component
def ThemeAwareCard():
    state = ClientState.from_context()

    with w.Card(style={"padding": "16px"}):
        w.Heading(text="Theme-Aware Card", level=3)
        w.Label(
            text=f"Current theme: {'Dark' if state.is_dark else 'Light'}",
            color=theme.text_secondary,
        )
        w.ThemeSwitcher()

@component
def Main():
    TrellisApp(app=ThemeAwareCard)

App = Main`}
/>

## How It Works

1. **Connection**: Client sends OS theme preference in hello message
2. **Initialization**: `TrellisApp` creates `ClientState` with detected theme
3. **Rendering**: `ThemeProvider` sets `data-theme` attribute on root element
4. **CSS Variables**: Tokens resolve based on `[data-theme="light"]` or `[data-theme="dark"]`
5. **Updates**: When OS theme changes (in System mode), client notifies server, triggering re-render
